endemic but as the regional hospitality
industry tries to pull itself
out of that economic hardship some new
south wales operators say
they can't find workers after the
bushfires
and the pandemic emptied herpambula
restaurant jackie smith is delighted to
see it packed
but while business is booming another
ingredient is missing
i've owned the business for just on
seven years and i've never faced
staff shortages as as much as as the
current situation
in the lead-up to summer jackie's
usually inundated with job applications
she believes coverts job seeker and job
keeper payments
have made prospective employees too
comfortable
it's almost encouraging people to work
less
and or not work at all unfortunately an
hour north the cabargo pub is also
struggling to find help
everyone loves coming to pub and having
a feed and enjoying themselves but yeah
we need the staff to be able to handle
it
a housing shortage isn't helping with
hundreds of homes lost in the fires
and city dwellers working remotely from
the bush
we've been trying to get a chef down
from sydney but he's quite keen to come
down but the issue has been trying to
get him somewhere to stay
it's about everywhere people don't want
to do this job anymore it's like a dying
trade
and coverts killed it business leaders
say there are no simple answers
the sector normally relies on overseas
workers
the opening up of domestic borders might
allow for more people to travel for work
but until foreign workers are allowed
back into the country times will be
tough
on regional hospitality venues the
reopening of the international
borders to australia is the next piece
of the puzzle that has to happen because
right now the level of economic
disruption
in regional areas particularly is
significant and making it very hard for
small businesses to stay alive
but given the year they've had these
venues are happy to be back in business
adrian reiden abc news pambula
well it happens to the best of us talent
and best intentions
quickly fall victim to our bodies
telling us that maybe it's time to slow
down
but in canberra there's now a variation
of the world game at a much
steadier pace brett mckay has the story
this is walking football and it really
is football as you know it
just played at a slower pace catering
for people of a certain age
it began in england years ago and has
made its way to australia more recently
walking football in canberra has been
around for two years now
started off quite small with about 10
players or so
and now we're at nearly over the 200
mark some have never played football
before
others have enjoyed a long life in the
game i've
been watching football with my dad since
i was a little girl
i played for about 14 years didn't start
till i was 40 years old
i just love football though it's been
particularly useful for adults of all
ages returning to activity from
incapacitating injuries
walking football is aimed at both males
and females over the age of 45
which means by a matter of mere months i
now qualify to give this a go
on a quarter-sized pitch games are
played as five on five
or six on six as numbers allow and with
unlimited interchange
the only real restriction being that
only the goalkeeper is allowed inside
the semicircle to maintain the element
of safety
but there's one adjustment people from a
long footballing background still
struggle with
passing to people who can't run you
can't put the ball three yards in front
of them it's got to be
to their feet and regardless of the
experience level the enjoyment factor is
there for everyone
well we play with friends it's all good
for most of our teams back for a second
year so we must be enjoying it just the
camaraderie
and the fact that um there's no pressure
unless you want there to be pressure
and it's just it's fun it's just for
everybody should come out and have a go
it's
really good that's the great thing about
football it is a sport that we can cater
for for everyone
it's not just something that caters for
one one type of person
even played at a walking pace this is
actually a pretty good workout
if walking football sounds like your
pace capital football run walking
football competitions in hawker on a
wednesday night
and in morrison on a sunday evening
brent mckay abc news canberra
[Music]
on the satellite troughs are triggering
showers and storms in northern western
australia and the northern territory
a broad trough is also directing intense
heat across central australia to south
australia
and also the eastern states scattered
storms in victoria
and southern new south wales as onshore
winds bring a few showers to southern
western australia
looking around the country for tomorrow
mostly sunny in the southeast and
northwest of queensland
hot and rainy in the northeast and a hot
windy day for the southwest
another hot day for new south wales and
the act cloudy in the northeast and
windy in the states south and west
in victoria clearing showers and cool
temperatures in the south
mostly sunny and warm in the north
turning to tasmania
showers easing and contracting to the
west and northeast by late morning
they're mostly clearing by the afternoon
mostly sunny across south australia cool
conditions for the southeast and central
parts of the state but a warm day for
the north
for western australia showers and storms
over the northeast sunny and hot in the
northwest
cloudy and cool in the states south and
in the northern territory showers storms
and hot weather in the top northwest of
the top end
mostly sunny and hot for item land in
the interior and late showers after a
hot day in the south looking ahead to
monday's forecast for our capital city
is a warm cloudy day for sydney
hot and mostly sunny in brisbane a warm
mostly sunny day for melbourne hobart
and canberra
clearing showers in perth and a hot day
for adelaide a possible storm
expected for you in darwin you are up to
date here with abc news remember you can
connect with us further
at news.abc.net.edu and on iview
i'm miriam saab stay with us a foreign
correspondent special
the rise of china is up next
[Music]
[Applause]
so
[Music]
whenever you want wherever you are know
the story with abc news
the most trusted news source get
breaking news updates with live
notifications
plus the latest news from australia and
around the world if the situation
deteriorates the hard border comes back
go to news.abc.net.edu or download the
news app
celebrating 75 years of covering life on
the land
i'm the only abc reporter for hundreds
of kilometers
in a special episode head off the beaten
track with
abc's rural reporters you've got the
table all set up for me
what happens out here matters see how
far we've come
he's one of the modern fathers of
australian agriculture and horticulture
and where we're going you've really got
to be a jack of all trades up here
landline tomorrow 12 30 on abc and iview
it's the final q a of the year and we're
going out with a bang
2020 has changed to all of us nothing
compares with this
it's a different world sometimes for the
worse stop hoarding i can't be more
blunt about it
stop it we didn't realize we were going
to be the problem sometimes for the
better while i may be the first woman in
this office
i will not be the last and jimmy barnes
will be here to take your questions plus
a special performance
do not miss it that's q a monday 9 35
abc and iview grandstand summer of
cricket is here
live and ad-free as australia face-off
against fierce rivals india
get all the action from the one day
internationals the t20s and the test
series grandstand summer of cricket
live on abc radio and the abc listen app
watch abc news live stream anywhere
anytime
on abc iview keep up to date with the
latest breaking stories from around the
corner
and across the globe and you can catch
up on all your favorite abc
news and current affairs programs head
to abc iview and livestream
abc news now
[Music]
it's 47 years since the abc opened its
first bureau
in china back then the capital was
called p
king and our correspondent got around on
a bicycle
covering the final convulsion of
chairman mao's cultural revolution
well since then the abc has been there
reporting on china's defining moments
in 1989 our news teams witnessed the
brutal crushing
of the pro-democracy movement in
tiananmen square
and then in 1997 britain's handover of
hong kong
when i was posted to beijing in 2001
china celebrated what it saw as long
overdue recognition of it as a great
power
when the capital was chosen to host the
olympics
through it all we've sought to tell the
big geopolitical stories
through the lives of ordinary people as
china
underwent a stunning economic
transformation
cities rising out of fields as hundreds
of millions of chinese
rose from the mire of poverty but the
abc's near half-century run of reporting
from china
ended abruptly recently with the
dramatic departure of correspondent bill
bertels forced to flee amid growing
political tensions
between beijing and canberra the china
of 2020
is increasingly assertive nationalistic
and
aggressive led by the all-powerful
president
xi jinping who has progressively
tightened his control
during nearly a decade in office in this
series foreign correspondent
retrospective the rise of china
will revisit our most notable
dispatchers from the first decade of
qi stories of hope and prosperity
social upheaval and political repression
we start in 2012 just before
chi's ascent to the leadership when
anything seemed possible
for china's go fast get rich crowd
as correspondent stephen macdonald
discovered
okay here we are
it's friday night in beijing and the
rich young
things have come out to play
in the 1970s you could be killed here by
a mob
for showing outward displays of wealth
now barely legal drivers can be seen
behind the wheels of six hundred
thousand dollar sports cars
[Music]
within ten years half the world's
billionaires will come from
china and tonight we go inside their
world
while other countries are in panic mode
over their stagnant economies
here they're making money and they're
flaunting it
wealthy people in china love their
private clubs
and the young rich are no different to
be a member of this establishment
there's a simple requirement
all you have to do is own a porsche 911
or something even flashier
[Music]
this is the beijing sports car club in
chai young's bar district
the night we visit is a kind of decadent
palace theme
party
[Applause]
[Music]
the members are mostly
20-something-year-old men
and the young maidens well they just
kind of appeared at one stage
chinese people refer to those moving in
these circles
as the fuardai the children of those who
got rich
when china suddenly opened up in the
1980s
whether it's fair or not they're seen as
the first generation
who've known nothing but wealth their
entire short
lives
across town their parents generation are
living it up their own way
the millionaire level which is let's say
british pound millionaires
we estimate there's 960 000 of them
which
has been growing about 10 percent or
more over the last
five years and if you look at the
billionaire level
us dollar billionaires and we estimate
there's 600 now
with the traps
rupert hoodworth makes his living by
observing china's
mega wealthy class to produce the hoon
report rich list
many chinese people say their bosses
have made it big
on the back of corrupt deals following
market reforms in the 1980s
but this self-styled wealth tracker says
the country has become
number one in terms of what he says as
self-made billionaires what's more
they're getting richer and richer
[Music]
i was with an entrepreneur last week who
has explained that
all goes to plan within 10 years time
he's going to be 10 times the size he is
today now
of course there's an element of i want
to challenge myself as well
but certainly these people you need to
be aware of them and we need to
understand this group
according to the hoon reports research
the typical chinese billionaire
is a 51 year old man his child is just
out of university
he lives in beijing
the typical millionaire is only 41 years
old
lives in shanghai or nearby provinces
and is planning to send his 10 year old
child to university
in australia canada britain or the
united states
i'm looking forward to our skiing
holiday
these are the people who are going to
rule the world aren't they
well they're very young still and
they're growing
very fast and so if you look at the bill
gates of this world who are well into
their 60s
and the buffets well into their 80s even
and
these chinese entrepreneurs are still in
their 40s possibly their 50s
well they've got enough 30 years to go
where they're going to end up
and according to this rich list the top
way for these people to make money
is real estate
this hotel has just been built in
14 days yes you heard it right
work went on around the clock and the
seemingly unthinkable pace of
construction
was achieved by using pre-made steel
frames
which were placed in like massive blocks
so now in the middle of nowhere
in central china's hunan province they
have their own tower
if i was standing in this exact location
just two weeks ago
i'd be on the ground surrounded by
vegetable gardens
now i'm on top of a 30-storey hotel and
i've got to say it's pretty surreal
the man behind this project is the
rather eccentric
and very successful businessman zhang
you air
with workers still putting the finishing
touches on his high speed hotel
he's already giving potential business
partners a tour of the site
of
[Music]
and he says eco-friendly alternative to
traditional building methods
[Music]
and we're taken on a tour of the
headquarters known as
broad town
this is not your average factory complex
the grounds include a massive replica of
a french chateau
designed by jungwe's wife and a giant
gold pyramid
which is apparently going to be used as
a museum to introduce visitors to the
philosophy of chairman
jungyeon
[Music]
he invented all the products abroad
group and his key
engineer for all designing
an inspirational person everyone around
him learned a lot
janue's personal fortune of an estimated
850 million
dollars originally came from making
diesel
and gas-powered air conditioners these
days he presents himself
as a buddhist green businessman on a
mission
he says he never uses a computer
and
[Applause]
his plan is to roll out building
component factories
first across china then other countries
including australia
and he's not short of belief in the
potential of this technology
which he calls civilized construction
[Music]
china's mad rush to urbanization is
responsible for producing a fair swag of
the country's wealthy elite
infrastructure iron and steel have been
big earners
and anyone who makes anything to do with
homes and
offices remains in the box seat in the
capital beijing
there's one company that's transformed
the very appearance of the city
we're lucky as a developer we're talking
about beijing
being built urbanized in 15 years
[Music]
is the ceo of soho china as a teenager
she
fled the cultural revolution to work in
a hong kong factory
she studied in cambridge became an
investment banker
and returned to china in the 1990s to
try her hand at property developing
she remembers the early discussions with
government officials
about what beijing was going to be like
they were talking about the future the
future of the cbd
will be like the manhattan of beijing
and i remember
when i first came back to beijing
hearing people talk about this and
thinking oh these guys
have never been to manhattan and have no
idea about what they're talking about
uh but you know seriously when you go
out today that's exactly
what's happening and you're surrounded
by these high-rise very
dense buildings and and it feels a
modern version of manhattan
if the beijing's cbd now looks like a
modern metropolis
that's in no small part because of
soho's towers
and they're not finished yet the
ambitions of this
company and its boss seem to know no
bounds
and perhaps this is a good metaphor for
this city
and even this country the designs are
becoming more striking
the locations more sought after and the
buildings
will let us getting bigger and bigger
but even being the largest developer in
beijing
has not made jung shin completely
satisfied
with the way things are going in china
we have moved backwards
by having more government-owned
companies
taking over uh and
uh you know that that's you know
powerful state-owned companies
are managing many many industries and
and so to that extent is is going
backwards
but you know i i think that uh
this if you look at the history
if you look from the historical point of
view this
none of those would stop the trend
of you know the the china moving forward
to become a more modernized
country and to be more integrated with
the rest of the world
yet some are hoping that it's
traditional culture which will propel
them to international success
[Music]
[Applause]
she owns the south beauty chain of
sichuan eateries
and on the opening day of her newest
outlet she gives the staff a solid
rev-up session
as with other chinese entrepreneurs her
ultimate goals are certainly not modest
junk food can be swept around the world
using chain stores
so can her sichuan style restaurants and
she's starting off by conquering china
what's more though her vision is big she
says she's prepared to take the long
view
to achieve ultimate success an attribute
lacking in many businesses here
that
but she can't be too critical of the
fast money crowd
as the company also has some very
upmarket watering holes
like beijing's land bar that are
specifically designed to lighten the
wallets of china's nouveau riche
this establishment is not for your
average chinese customer
there are drinks here that cost the same
as a week's salary for a factory worker
but these are not the clientele that
this place is aimed at
and it's a measure of the affluence in
this town but there are no shortage of
well-heeled patrons
but more than happy to come along and
fill these seats
[Music]
many in china believe that their country
is arriving at a powerful
and privileged place
a place where international designers
are flown in
to create pleasure palaces like nowhere
on earth
there's not a lot of communism in any of
this
if you got the cash in this country you
can pretty much get whatever you want
well this isn't bad is it i'm sitting on
a private jet
flying in between beijing and shanghai
i've got my champagne and it's pretty
comfortable now
i'm sitting here with jean-michel jacob
from daso and it's his
business to sell these jets to chinese
people so
who are you mainly selling to what types
of people in china
our main customers are big corporations
or private individuals owning big
corporations
bankers real estate mining and they
buy those aircraft for developing their
activity
in china in asia and throughout the
world
and how hard is it to be selling these
jets at this moment
in china it's not that hard selling
those jets today because
they need them their market is booming
here it's booming elsewhere they are
rich they can buy the world they can
invest
everywhere and then they need
commodities so
it's rather easier compared to
what it is in europe or in america
nowadays
cheers cheers in china the military
controls all airspace
until recently this made it hard for
private jets to operate
but as the space has been freed up the
mega rich have
lined up to buy
to own one of these particular planes
all you need is a spare 53 million
dollars
then there are the running costs of
around two million dollars a year
the hefty price tag is not dampening
sales
three years ago we sold three
aircraft and this 2011 we sold
15 aircraft and we expect to sell much
more in 2012.
afterwards we still talk about those
three engines
and these jets might well come in handy
for wealthy chinese
because there's another thing about them
surveys show that
75 of the country is super rich have
either left in order to get hold of a
foreign passport
or are seriously considering it this is
seen as an insurance policy
in case things go bad in china
[Music]
of course if you don't have a private
jet to get you out of here
there's always the pointy end of any
commercial aircraft
[Music]
[Applause]
and if the wheels fall off china's great
leap into affluence
this will be the first place it hits in
guangdong
the southern province that sees itself
as the world's factory
they produce just about everything but
some see future social
political and even economic turmoil
threatening it all
[Applause]
what then for the production lines which
were once fields
the farmers who've become workers and
the taxi drivers
who've turned into millionaires
[Music]
runs jin chung electronics with his
business partner
sun jinyoung
he says he arrived in shenzhen 13 years
ago
with around 150 that he drove a taxi for
two years
then opened a fast food restaurant and
finally got enough money together
to jump into manufacturing becoming a
boss has transformed his life
but if your personal wealth is like his
between
600 000 and a million dollars
that goes a long way in southern china
[Music]
yet the world is changing and it's
possible that the good times won't last
forever for china's manufacturers
[Music]
the towers of shenzhen literally sprang
from nothing in recent decades
to create a city which owes its wealth
to china's export boom
but employees here are becoming less and
less likely to work for peanuts
meaning that other countries can now
undercut china in terms of production
costs
so what will this mean in the long run
for shenzhen's businesses
[Music]
many chinese factories have also been
hit by collapse in demand
following world financial turmoil if
this company sells 80
of its products domestically
[Music]
[Applause]
more and more chinese businesses are now
pinning their hopes on the huge
local market rather than uncertain
global climate
it's even thought that chinese consumers
will eventually
transform the international economy by
simply buying things
[Music]
well the general consensus is that
you've got another 15 years
of fast growth derived from this
urbanization program and if it all goes
to plan
at that stage it will then remarkably
slow down and at that point
we're going to have to look for the
so-called middle class who are going to
start spending
in china and that would be when chinese
brands really come to the front
if you like
[Applause]
in the meantime it's luxury european
brands
that are counting on china's super rich
class to shore up their fortunes
is from the east coast city of qingdao
and he's the founder of the beijing
sports car club
he divides his time between his hometown
and the capital
sometimes driving between the two with
his mates or family members
should do
[Music]
is very cagey about where his and his
family's money has come from
he says he's an investor in the service
industry if so he's been very successful
because his collection of sports cars is
worth a not so
small fortune
what's more this young man in his
twenties
says his parents have merely offered him
moral support
and that he's been able to earn enough
himself to service his ultra expensive
past
[Music]
time
who says america is the land of
capitalist dreams
here you can get rich show it off and as
long as you're on the right side
of powerful people nobody's going to
question
how you got to where you are
[Music]
this may be a country of massive wealth
disparity
but even the smallest percentage of
mega-rich individuals
becomes in china a large and extremely
powerful group and with their tear-away
success
and big ambitions it's a group
that's going to go a very long way
[Music]
do
know the tradition the cultural bird
brings the land back to life
know the reason the most important thing
to me as a gundam girl person is
protecting country for future
generations
know the languages reporting from our in
the country lara kia country
reporting from ghana country reporting
from pinematic from lara kia country
i'm on your toyota country from nepaluna
lutrowita
for abc news know the meaning i
in this country this country is me know
the story with abc news
tonight federal police crack an alleged
child care fraud ring
worth millions
[Music]
temperature records broken as new south
wales south australia and victoria
swelter through a weekend heatwave
a queensland man behind bars tonight
facing terrorism-related charges
and meet the rangers working to keep
fires out of the western top end this
summer
[Music]
good evening and welcome to abc news i'm
mariam saab with the top stories
federal police say a child care provider
in melbourne
used phantom children in a multi-million
dollar child care fraud scheme
police say prime family day care has
been claiming more federal government
payments
than any other similar business in the
country now its owner
ola oda and four others are accused of
defrauding the commonwealth
of up to 15 million dollars olaouda
lives a lavish lifestyle
heading up a large child care provider
look after yourself look after the kids
under your care but now federal police
are questioning how that lifestyle was
funded we uncovered you know multiple
properties multiple
vehicles luxury vehicles including a
maserati and bmws and such
the prime family daycare owner was
arrested on wednesday
accused of leading a syndicate that
illegally claimed millions in child care
subsidies
by registering children who did not
attend
child care to make false payment claims
phantom children if you will those
charged include 42 year old oluda and
her 47 year old partner amjad shahada
both of doncaster east
a 39 year old senior office employee
from epping
and two